doc: clarify `require` behavior with non `.js` extensions (#41345)
nodejs/node: doc/api/modules.md

The module system is implemented in the `require('module')` module.

## Enabling

<!-- type=misc -->

Node.js treats JavaScript code as CommonJS modules by default.

> Authors can tell Node.js to treat JavaScript code as CommonJS modules

Reviewer: This seems weird to say “it’s the default, and here’s how you can make it apply”.

For file extensions, .cjs is always CJS, .mjs is always ESM, .js is CJS by default (but type module can make this be ESM), and anything else is either .json, .node, .wasm, or “unknown” (which is treated as CJS). Piped input is CJS by default, but can be made ESM with the input-type flag.

Can we say something basically exactly like that?

Author: I'll remove this section from this PR and move it to a separate PR so it can be discussed separately if that's ok.

The module system is implemented in the `require('module')` module.

## Enabling

<!-- type=misc -->

> Node.js treats JavaScript code as CommonJS modules by default.
> Authors can tell Node.js to treat JavaScript code as CommonJS modules
> via the `.cjs` file extension, the `package.json` [`"type"`][] field, or the
> `--input-type` flag. See
> [Determining module system](packages.md#determining-module-system) for more
> details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Node.js has two module systems: CommonJS and ES modules.
Node.js treats JavaScript code as CommonJS modules by default.
Within an ES module context, authors can tell Node.js to treat
JavaScript code as CommonJS modules via the `.cjs` file extension,
the `package.json` [`"type"`][] field, or the `--input-type` flag. See
[Determining module system](packages.md#determining-module-system) for more
details.
```

Reviewer: Everything is an es module context. Type module doesn’t create an “es module context”, it just changes the default parse goal for .js files.

Reviewer: I guess, put another way - what exactly is an “ES module context”? Within a filesystem, you can use extensions with or without the type module flag; in a command line, you can use the input-type flag.

Author: I'm not sure I understand what would an ES module context mean either. Also, FWIW I've copied this section from `esm.md`, so if we want to change its wording maybe it's best to make a separate PR for that? I'm tempted to remove this change from this PR so it can be discussed separately. wdyt?https://github.com/nodejs/node/blob/2bc1d9245b987aa747173f5aea4883df18314f46/doc/api/esm.md#L97-L102

required filename with the added extensions: `.js`, `.json`, and finally
`.node`.

`.json` files are parsed as JSON text files, `.node` files are interpreted as
compiled addon modules loaded with `process.dlopen()`. Files using an unknown

> extension (or no extension at all) are parsed as JavaScript text files.

Reviewer: “JavaScript text files” doesn’t tell me whether it’s as a Script/CJS, or as ESM, since JavaScript text files have two parse goals. (i know the answer - that it’s CJS - but it’d be good if this sentence was unambiguous)

Author: I think the wording here is carefully chosen so it applies to both CJS and ESM. Any non-`.json`-nor-`.node` extension is treated as JS text file, which may be either a module (in which case the require call will throw) or a script. I'm not a fan of ambiguity myself, but I don't think here is the place to list the rules to determine if a JS text file is parsed as script or module. wdyt?

Reviewer: I think if ambiguity is the intention, your PR as-is indeed captures the ambiguity correctly :-)

Reviewer 3: The CommonJS loader _does_ parse JS as CommonJS scripts always though, so I think @ljharb's seeking a clarification does make sense - there isn't ambiguity in play.

Author: Calling `require` on an ES module doesn't make it CJS, it throws a `ERR_REQUIRE_ESM`. Replacing `JavaScript text files` with `CommonJS modules` would not be an improvement imho. Do you have a suggestion that removes the ambiguity?

Reviewer 3: Yes you're right, `.mjs` and `.js` in `"type": "module"` are excluded by this error, which does form an ambiguity of sorts.

Perhaps then explain exactly that, and that will solidify the ESM distinction:

> `.mjs` or `.js` files within a `"type": "module"` package boundary throw an `ERR_REQUIRE_ESM` error. All other files are parsed as CommonJS scripts.

Author: What if we link to the ad-hoc section in `packages.md`?

Reviewer: Except for json and .node and wasm files.

Author: `require('./file.wasm')` loads `file.wasm` as CJS:

```sh
mkdir repro
cd repro
echo 'console.log(this !== undefined)' > file.wasm
echo 'require("./file.wasm")' | node
```

> compiled addon modules loaded with `process.dlopen()`. Files using an unknown
> extension (or no extension at all) are parsed as JavaScript text files.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
compiled addon modules loaded with `process.dlopen()`. Files using any other
extension (or no extension at all) are parsed as JavaScript text files.
```

We can't really say that `.js` is an unknown extension.

required filename with the added extensions: `.js`, `.json`, and finally
`.node`.

`.json` files are parsed as JSON text files, `.node` files are interpreted as
compiled addon modules loaded with `process.dlopen()`. Files using any other
extension (or no extension at all) are parsed as JavaScript text files. Refer to
the [Determining module system][] section to understand what parse goal will be
used.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

`.cjs` files always need their extension to be included:
`require('./file.cjs')`. The `.cjs` extension cannot be left out
of `require` calls like `.js` can be.
```

Author: I've added a note about this in 5ed7e1cdf3d36a4e396e6cceade02743f872b4ea, let me know if that works for you.

Reviewer 2: Sure, looks good.
